they have those high status positions
they're entrenched in their economic
fortunes they have economic security
through the bureaucracy through the
tenure system etc
so they're cynically pushing this
narrative
as a way to redistribute status and
prestige which is really what they crave
that's the real currency that's the real
redistribution well everyone craves that
christopher i would say because
there isn't anything that you have
that's more valuable than your
reputation you trade on your reputation
people who have stored up genuine value
in their reputation and who have been
honest players and who know how to work
and know how to share
are
much more likely to be rewarded with a
deserved prestige but the narcissists
and the psychopaths and the intellectual
machiavellians can parasitize that by
making unwarranted moral claims and then
saying about themselves that they are as
good or better than the people they're
criticizing and because they have
intellectual prowess they're often able
to out argue the people who have accrued
genuine moral virtue that might be like
the self-made working-class types who
know what's right and who act out what's
right but who aren't as able to
articulate it which is a challenge on
the conservative side
[Music]
hello everyone i'm very pleased today to
be talking with mr christopher ruffo
who's emerged as a
national and international class
troublemaker i would say and policy
advisor on the culture war front
especially in relationship to issues of
public education and
critical race theory whatever that means
and
both philosophically and politically
that's what we're going to delve into
today christopher is a senior fellow and
director of the initiative on critical
race theory at the manhattan institute
he's also a contributing editor at city
journal where his writing explores a
range of issues including critical race
theory homelessness addiction crime
and the decline of cities on america's
west coast
mr rufo
also as i said became a focal point of
attention on the culture warfront for
reasons we will discuss in this podcast
he recently launched a youtube channel
called christopher ruffo theory
concentrating on all these philosophical
political and practical issues
thank you very much mr ruffo christopher
for agreeing to talk to me today
it's a pleasure to be with you
so let's start with a broad question um
three i suppose who are you
what in the world are you up to and why
have people so suddenly in some real
sense become
interested why have you become a focal
point of attention on these issues
sure i i think it's because i was really
the first person to do the reporting to
actually substantiate the feeling that
many people had that our institutions
had been captured by left-wing
ideologies
and this has obviously been a kind of
concern for many people for a long time
but for many years it felt like it was
relegated to the university setting and
so conservatives could say well you know
there's something crazy going on at
vassar college it doesn't affect me
then after the death of george floyd in
2020 uh it seemed like all of our
institutions suddenly shifted overnight
so i did a series of reports on uh
diversity training programs in the
federal government that got the
attention of then president trump then i
shifted to looking at critical race
theory
implemented as a pedagogical approach in
k-12 schools which set off this massive
uh uh uh response or really revolt
amongst parents nationwide and now i'm
focusing on on gender ideology as well
looking at k-12 schools government
agencies and even the fortune 100
companies and so what i think i've been
able to do that's been able to galvanize
attention is
take these issues establish a factual
basis saying this is what's happening
these are the documents and then
describing the origins whether it's
critical race theory or queer theory in
a way that
the average person a parent in a public
school district for example can start to
then push back and that's really been my
goal i'm kind of an accidental activist
never set out to be an activist uh but
as it turns out uh i'm kind of leading
this fight in many ways uh and here in
the united states right so you think you
were able to make these issues to take
them out of the purely academic realm
while they were moving out of the purely
academic realm to articulate what they
are to articulate people's concerns
about that parental concerns in
in specifically and also to
act as an advisor let's say and an
educator on the political front does
that seem about right
yeah that's exactly right and i think
what i've been able to do and it's
actually been um just really fascinating
and rewarding process is to kind of take
my very small team and we run the whole
gamut so we start at the very beginning
which is always creating new information
uh in the sense that we're fielding
reports we're talking to whistleblowers
we're authenticating documents we're
putting them on television we're putting
them on social media so people are aware
of what's happening
and then all of a sudden people said
well how do we talk about this you know
whether it's
people in co you know congressmen or
state legislators or governors hey
what's going on with critical race
theory what's the language i should be
using what can we do about it and then i
started putting together those uh kind
of memos and an advisory capacity saying
hey this is what's actually happening
this is what's going on beneath the
surface and this is what you can do
about it right okay so you're also
detailing the way that this system of
ideas let's say you're also detailing
the way that this system of ideas
is manifesting itself concretely in the
educational establishment and in actual
institutions so it's not merely a
theoretical discussion
yeah that's exactly right and there's a
really important point on on that
distinction uh uh that i that i think is
really critical um a lot of the debates
that we've had in in recent years
kind of restrict themselves to that
theoretical basis it's almost like
people who are playing politics
intellectuals journalists are having an
oxford style uh debate
and there's this really i think an
illusion that if you win the debate in
the kind of marketplace of ideas then
your ideas will win what i've done is
i've exposed that that's actually not
true it's not how it works it's really
actually a harmful illusion because when
you have bureaucrats who have a very
specific ideology that control public
resources they control the curriculum
they control human resources departments
or
diversity equity and inclusion
departments
even if you have the better ideas they
have the political power and so my big
takeaway and my big call really to
conservatives is to say
sure having a stimulating intellectual
discussion is important i enjoy it many
people enjoy it but we actually have to
get down to that structural level of
bureaucratic and political power and i
was able to show through the reporting
hey this is what they're implementing in
schools these are the people who are
doing it um and these are people who
have captured you know hundreds of
millions of dollars in public resources
and we should really focus the debate
there if we want to have a chance to
changing this uh cultural pattern okay
well i want to return to that because
one of the
i'm going to play devil's advocate on
the kimberley crenshaw in section
intersectionality crt front and i also
want to have a discussion with you about
the
the place of this war let's say the
proper place of the war because one of
the concerns i have about attempts to
fight critical race theory at the
practical and pragmatic level is that
attempts to regulate or ban it and i'm
not saying this is happening i'm saying
it's a potential danger attempts to
regulate or ban it
run into the potential problem of
expanding the sensorial capacity of
governments in relationship to
educational institutions and the free
flow of ideas and that when especially
when you're dealing with something
that's as difficult to pin down and
define let's say as critical race theory
because where's its boundaries that
poses a potential danger for the future
we don't want to establish government
institutions that are heavy-handed in
their sensorial capacity so we'll go
back to that we'll go back to that let's
start though
maybe we could start for the audience
and i'd like you to talk about
definitions so let's talk about
four domains okay perhaps we can try to
intertangle all of them
what specifically is critical race
theory that's a very difficult thing to
to define
um how is that related to queer theory
which is something that people know even
less about and why should we care and
then how do you think these are related
to these broader issues of say
post-modern philosophy and the marxism
that comes tagging along in its wake so
let's start with crt
what is crt how did you become aware of
it how should people understand it
so i first became aware of critical race
theory really working backwards as i
mentioned i was doing this series of
reports on these diversity training
programs in the federal government and
once you look at enough of these
documents they're all the same they
recycle the same 10 set of concepts or
so and so i said where does this come
from
what is the origin of the of this theory
and so i started working backwards
looking at the footnotes looking at the
suggested readings and then really
discovered over time the common
intellectual framework is critical race
theory the definition is pretty simple
critical race theory maintains that the
united states is a fundamentally racist
country and that all of its institutions
from the constitution to the law to the
nuclear family to the uh social
institutions manners and maurice
preach uh uh the values of liberty and
equality but these are really just smoke
screens for naked racial domination and
so they look at the entirety of american
history from the declaration uh to the
constitution even to abraham lincoln and
then to the civil rights act and they
say it appears that there's racial
progress it appears that there's
reconciliation
but that's an illusion actually it's
just that power has become more
sophisticated more subtle and more
insidious and so you're starting from
that point and then you're analyzing any
social phenomenon and you're you know
surprise surprise discovering uh not
only that it's
a manifestation of racism but they try
to say uh we're going to give you tools
to to show exactly how that's true okay
so who would you identify as let's do
this in two tiers who are the main
thinkers on the
uh critical race theory front per se and
then
who would you identify as the more
fundamental sources of the ideas that
are driving these 10 common concepts
let's say that are running through such
phenomena as
diversity training so who are the main
critical race theorists
sure so the critical race theory the
godfather of critical race theory was a
a
black harvard law professor named
derrick bell who was hired as the first
full-time uh black law professor at
harvard in the late 1960s and bella's a
really fascinating person he set the
tone of critical race theory it's an
ideology of extreme cynicism a kind of
negative philosophy a kind of negation
based philosophy and he cultivated a
network of young students he was a very
charismatic figure
wrote a series of books kind of
allegorical books talking about how
racism was the permanent indestructible
and overwhelming feature of the united
states and this message had a lot of
students both at harvard law school and
other law
law schools other legal academies around
the country and some of those students
came together in the late 1980s kimberly
crenshaw's one mari matsuda charles
lawrence a number of other uh figures uh
uh at that time came together really
under his tutelage and then established
critical race during the late 1980s and
then then you see the kind of remarkable
documentation that they've actually made
themselves talking about how they
started in law schools and then they
went to public health and sociology and
and other academic departments and then
finally trickled into diversity
trainings and k-12 pedagogy and so
that's the basic kind of you know
10-second lineage of where this comes
from okay excellent so now in terms of
the intellectual influences so look for
everyone listening when you you try to
analyze the operation of a set of ideas
you want to find out first who the
current proponents are in the
conversation that's going on now but
then you need to trace it back
to deeper ideas and the philosophers and
sometimes the theologians even depending
on how deep you go
from whom those ideas flow and in order
to understand the entire structure of
the system of ideas and it's into
relationships so that you can understand
its motivation and its nature you have
to delve deeper into the underlying
history of the ideas so we have crenshaw
matsudo and lawrence mitsudo have i got
that pronunciation right
yeah matsuda matsuta okay um and who
would you say their intellectual who are
their intellectual inspirations
i would say there are really two key
inspirations one is derek bell and derek
bell's innovation um was bringing this
really acidic this really kind of
solvent political philosophy
he was the first person to really
weaponize identity politics in the elite
institution he was famous not for his
legal scholarship
but actually famous for his political
and campus activism um you know he would
do things like write law review papers
where he would fantasize
about about black law professors and the
president of his university getting
assassinated
and then he would conduct these protests
outside their office to kind of raise
the pressure to hire specific left-wing
radicals in the legal academy and so his
students saw him uh not only as an
intellectual inspiration but also they
said he's he's really tapping into the
pragmatic politics and so you have derek
bell in the legal tradition the other
person that i think is really essential
for them someone that they cite over and
over in their big red book of critical
race theory
is antonio gramsci and because what they
wanted was not just derrick bell who had
this kind of cynical and pessimistic
philosophy that didn't seem to have much
practical application beyond the campus
um and so they bring in gramsci of
course who
talks about how in order to win the
battle of ideas in order to have
influence over the
economic and political base of a society
you want to infiltrate and then shift
those those those mechanisms and
institutions of cultural production and
cultural patterning and so they take uh
derek bell kind of a kind of radical
racialist philosophy uh they take his
identity politics and office politics
and then they graft onto it this kind of
marxian or gramscian
anthropology
and then also the gramscian tactic of
trying to then gain influence by getting
into
corporations and to schools and to other
parts of the academy
and on that front i think they've been
remarkably successful okay so that's
when it starts to sound conspiratorial
so now i want to do two things i want to
talk a little bit more about gramsci and
i also want to talk about the
relationship between
let's say derek bell antonio gramsci
the left wing because you make the case
and well not only you obviously but the
case is made quite continually that this
is a left-wing movement so why left what
and who are the who are the influences
on that front uh the left-wing
influences and how do you see all this
developing in relationship to the ideas
that people like jacques derrida and
michelle foucault and karl marx have
developed and put forward as well that
would bring us in principles somewhat
deeper can we start with gramsci
yeah we can start with gramsci i think
gramsci is very useful uh for
let's say post-world war ii uh uh
left-wing intellectuals and specifically
if you look at the history of the united
states you had a a really boom in
radical left-wing politics in the late
1960s and early 1970s one of the
greatest representations and something
from which the critical race theorists
explicitly draw from is the black
nationalist movement so these were
explicit marxist leninist maoists
revolutionaries they believed that they
could change the entire structure of the
united states through armed guerrilla
warfare
specifically looking at urban centers on
the west coast and the east coast
and this of course spectacularly crashed
and burned and so the critical race
theorists they say we're we're inspired
by the black nationalist movements
because we share in some sense the same
goals we want to have a kind of total
overturning of society we want to move
away from capitalism we want to move
away from individual rights we want to
move away from an unfettered first
amendment free speech that's mari
matsuda's argument uh and we want to
have a kind of collectivist uh uh and
racially egalitarian society in which
the scales are balanced based on group
identity
but what they found and discovered is
that the uh you know throwing hand
grenades at the police in oakland
california is not going to overturn an
advanced industrial society like the
united states
and of course these are people who are
embedded in the most elite institutions
united states places most notably like
harvard law school and so uh you know
harvard law school student and then
professor is unlikely uh uh uh to be
winning and that's in that way so they
said what do we have well we have access
to elite institutions we have a way of
playing institutional politics that we
learn from derek bell you can
essentially bully shame and pressure
people
using all of those tactics of identity
politics to really get what you want so
why don't we just do that at scale why
don't we use our our position
our prestige our institutional power
within these places
to then
bring forth and legitimize some of those
more radical ideas that you might get
from let's say eldridge cleaver or
angela davis in the 1960s but we're
going to take away the epithets and the
the profanities and the you know the
calls to execute police officers we're
going to make them respectable we're
going to give them a gloss of academic
language so taking those latinate words
those multi-syllabic words making it
sound a very very very fancy very
respectable very intellectually
intimidating and then we're going to
feed it through the system through these
transmission belts and the critical race
theorists themselves talk about this as
they have their 10-year reunions they
actually interview each other and talk
about the progress of their ideas so you
can actually market decade by decade and
they say you know we started as a legal
discipline but actually our greatest
strength is in education and so they
built up this entire pedagogy and they
said to change the world again like any
left-wing revolutionary has said for the
last hundred and odd years you have to
change how children are taught and so
the critical race theorists were very
focused on building a pedagogy and so
these are the ideas systemic racism
whiteness white privilege
intersectionality uh etc these kind of
core set of ideas that are now
ubiquitous
at one time were really marginal
academic ideas uh uh limited to just
very few of these uh scholars and
intellectuals we'll get back to more in
just a second first we'd like to tell
you about birch gold the consumer price
index has reached yet another 40-year
high and the latest gdp numbers confirm
that the united states is in a recession
now is not the time to have all your
money in the stock market or tied to the
u.s dollar take action to protect your
savings from a highly turbulent economy
now by diversifying at least some of
your investment portfolio into gold and
silver from birch gold group text jordan
to 989898 and birch gold will send you a
free information kit on how to
transition an ira or eligible 401k into
an ira in precious metals birch gold
will even help you hold gold in a tax
sheltered account for decades investors
have relied on gold and silver as a
hedge against inflation now you can too
with an a plus rating with a better
business bureau countless five-star
reviews and thousands of satisfied
customers secure your future with gold
from birch gold now text jordan to
989898 and get real help from birch gold
today again text jordan to 989898 to
claim your free no obligation
information kit on how to protect your
hard earned savings with gold
[Music]
okay so now let's let's go
under that again a bit and then we'll
return to gramsci i think so
my understanding please correct me okay
my understanding of the relationship
between such ideas and the broader
intellectual tradition focuses for me on
foucault derrida and marx and so
darida in particular
based his philosophy his post-modern
philosophy on the idea that
um
there's no uniting grand narrative and
if there is that grand narrative has
been harnessed in the service of the
kind of power and oppression that you
described and daredevil described the
west as fell p-h-a-l-l-o
fellow
foul logo-centric
male-dominated centered on the idea of
logic from the greeks let's say in the
enlightenment tradition and the idea of
logos from the judeo-christian tradition
and centering and privileging those
concepts and hypothetically the people
those concepts represented which would
have been males
particularly and then secondarily in
some sense white males and part of what
daredevil wanted to do
and
and foucault as well who had a similar
theoretical framework was to bring those
he ideas and people he regarded as
unfairly and
marginalized by tyrannical systems of
power to the center and that aligned as
far as i can tell with the marxist
presupposition and daredevil makes this
explicit and it's not like it is common
knowledge that foucault was also
radically leftist as were so many french
intellectuals of the time is the
marxists had a doctrine that was very
similar because they regarded the entire
battleground of human history let's say
in all the relations between individuals
as characterized fundamentally by the
expression of nothing but arbitrary
power including institutions like
marriage all economic institutions and
even friendship and marx decried the
oppressive relationship between the
bourgeoisie the upper ruling class let's
say in the proletariat the working class
and believe that when the revolution
came that those who were unjustly
oppressed in the name of power would
take center stage and so the postmodern
and the neo-marxist and the marxist
ideas could just collapse on top of each
other i think the french intellectuals
of the 1970s did that in some sense
uh and turned to ideas like the ones
you're discussing
consciously and purposefully because
they also realized as did the 1960s
radicals especially in the aftermath of
solzhenitsyn's revolutions about the
brutality of the stalinist era that a
pure
pure movement forward on the communist
revolutionary front let's say just
wasn't going to fly was no longer
ethically tenable but was also
practically unachievable now is there
anything in the
my derivation of the sources of
these ideas to those sources that you
think is incomplete or erroneous that
needs to be expanded
critical if you look at the lineage this
is a fascinating question on critical
race theory it's almost like an
intellectual stew if you read their big
red book and some of the other minor
books um
they appeal to almost everyone it's
almost like they're agnostic whatever
left-wing revolutionary or
deconstructionist thinkers they're going
to grab bits and pieces from all of them
so they specifically appeal to
post-modernism they specifically appeal
uh uh to gramsci they specifically
appeal to black nationalism they
specifically appeal to all these
concepts and in the early work you sense
that when they're when they're kind of
grasping for the post-modernist
post-modernist techniques
um they're doing so almost out of a kind
of fashionable a a pose or a posture
i don't think that it's really essential
to what they're doing though
because i think if you look at queer
theory obviously foucault darada
postmodernism it's essential it's a
hundred percent of the intellectual
lineage on the kind of axis of sex and
gender but on the axis of race and
specifically looking at the critical
race theorists um i i don't think that
it's the essential or defining uh a set
of ideas they may appeal to them because
i think during the 90s that was really
fashionable among intellectuals you had
to cite foucault you had to cite
post-modernism you had to call into
question the existence of an objective
or absolute truth or a grand narrative
there is a bit of that but i think when
critical race theory kind of brass tacks
when it comes down to it it's much more
a direct marxist revolutionary even
almost a materialistic philosophy
because they take as the basis what they
really want is a total leveling of
society
and when they're grasping around for
solutions
that's where i think you can really get
to the crux of what critical race theory
is you take that old marxist framework
of oppressor and oppress to kind of war
between the classes you substitute
racial categories for economic
categories so they say the history of
the united states is not the history of
the rich oppressing the poor although it
is in part but it's really a history of
of of whiteness and blackness this
almost metaphysical struggle uh between
these two uh racial forces
and so what do they want what is well
you kind of read you say okay you know
let's say we even buy into your premise
what would you want um they want to
overturn capitalism uh they think that
that
they really think of whiteness and
property as synonymous and mutually
reinforcing so unless you have the
equality of property the equality of
wealth
you're always going to have a kind of
racially based inequality because into
our system of rights into our system of
private property into our system of free
exchange is embedded a
racialist and really uh racially
oppressive notion of of whiteness
they're inseparable they also think that
some of those key constitutional pillars
or the key
pillars of the bill of rights such as
free speech
encourages or allows racial domination
so you need to have really a regulator
or a state power
to suppress the speech of people uh who
would uh who would use it to reinforce
that that system of racial domination
and even even the 14th amendment and
then by to a lesser extent the civil
rights act of 1964 they say no no a lot
of hand waving you know derek bell
famously said that you know lincoln
didn't uh free the slaves in order to
advance racial justice and the 14th
amendment was really a kind of fake a a
a kind of a fake expression of equality
um all the way leading up even to the
1964 civil rights act to desegregation
and so what do they want they really
want a
focused state power uh they look to for
example the decolonial postcolonial
regimes in africa that seized land and
wealth and then redistributed along
racial lines that was one of their
inspirations in the 1990s and so when
you put all these elements together
you're really getting the end of the
constitutional system
because look if you don't have free
speech you don't have individual rights
you don't have equal protection under
the law those are just all masks for
power as you pointed out okay so let me
make the counter claim here for a minute
okay and then we'll we'll we'll get into
this in more detail so i've read a fair
bit of the 1619 project book book
actually i liked and i was reviewing a
fair bit of kimberly crenshaw's work on
intersectionality before i interviewed
you today and so let me push back as
hard as i can on this so
the basic claim is that
all of these institutions that are in
some sense central to what has been
described as the western enlightenment
and also judeo-christian tradition and
put forth as a moral virtue a set of
truly moral guidelines is actually
nothing but a front for the domination
of a small number of individuals who you
can usually characterize by both race
and gender race gender and sexual
preference let's say so white
heterosexual males now it is the case
that
white heterosexual males occupy a
disproportionate
number of
the most influential positions in
society it is also the case that
racial minorities and you could put
sex minorities and sexual minorities in
that same category do tend to be over
represented let's say at the bottom of
the heap
and
it is also the case that people who have
positions of authority and power are
likely to harness whatever they can
philosophically and theologically let's
say to buttress the cl their claim that
their
their their uh occupation of those
positions of power authority and
privilege are justified not only on
pragmatic grounds uh because they fought
let's say fair unfairly for what they
have but also on moral grounds and so
why isn't it acceptable to swallow the
radical leftist critique wholeheartedly
and say look if you're not naive
and you do know that power can corrupt
and that power does corrupt and that
many of our institutions are corrupt and
that merit isn't the only basis upon
which people progress that it's
reasonable to view the entire history
let's say of western civilization as the
attempt to merely dominate and to use
very elaborate structures of
rationalization to provide a moral
framework for nothing but that dominance
that's basically the argument so what
what's wrong with that argument
sure well i mean
if we kind of take a step back in some
ways i'm somewhat sympathetic to it if
you look at the history of civilizations
obviously a lot of the principles you
know proposed or espoused by leading
leading figures are rationalizations
there's a certain truth to that this
stuff is not totally bogus or totally
out of left field but the question is
okay let's actually get down to the
implementation let's get down into the
practical unfolding of this historical
experience
you start from a position a starting
point let's say around the american
founding where human slavery for example
was a universal throughout space and
time up until that point
and the declaration of independence was
a radical egalitarian document an
attempt to raise human civilization up
uh from a kind of morass up from a kind
of a a kind of world of where this kind
of domination was accepted did they
transform every element in society in a
single generation no but did they make
significant progress towards those
republican values that they espoused
absolutely they did um and so if you
look at american history from that
perspective where you have the tragic
nature of of man the tragic nature of
society you have
these these people entering into a
historical moment in which the world
looked uh a a very bleak in a lot of
ways
they're
bringing that level of civilization i
think undoubtedly upward
and so you start from that premise where
they see nothing but domination they see
nothing but negativity nothing but a
kind of parade of horrors um i think any
honest looking at american history could
say absolutely we've had a a a real
history of racial injustice a real
history uh that has to be grappled with
but if you put it in the context of the
highest ideals from the uh declaration
to the constitution to the speeches of
abraham lincoln and the actions of
lincoln
you can see this kind of rising level of
always moving towards the completion of
or the the realization of those highest
ideals
so that's one thing you look at it from
a historical context and then the second
thing is you look at it in a comparative
way
where you say okay let's let's even
grant you let's say your argument is
true these are rationalizations used for
domination
what other system would you suggest
what other country would you would you
proffer as a as a better alternative you
know i started my career as a
documentary filmmaker and so over that
you know 10 15 years of my first part of
my career i traveled to somewhere
between 70 75 different countries around
the world and so i got to see how
pretty much
all of the major population groups live
all of the major governing systems
um and so i think we should be very
careful when we say we're going to throw
out the entire western tradition we're
going to throughout the entire american
tradition we're gonna throw out the
entire system of capitalism the entire
system of constitutional government in
pursuit of some vague and fuzzy utopia
where we can really level society
completely and i think you asked them
well what countries do it better what
countries would you rather model your
society on uh and and then you start to
actually have a practical view so let me
push back against that a little bit so
um because i'm trying to do what i can
to argue for the other side let's say
sure so i might say well these western
countries that you point to as pillars
of freedom and and democracy and
uh and wealth and in terms of let's say
the remediation of
of of absolute privation the reason that
they're
the reason that a small minority of
people within them are hyper successful
is because they oppress and dominate the
others in that society and siphon off
excess resources from them in a manner
that's akin to theft that's a marxist
perspective and then sure the reason
that the united states and canada and
great britain let's say are wealthy in
the manner that they are it has nothing
to do with the essential virtues of
capitalism in the free market and
everything with to do with the fact that
they took all the land from the native
americans that they've been colonial
nations that they've exploited the third
world and that
and that they've devote they've diverted
resources that should have been more
equitably distributed across the world
and within their own societies for the
benefit of a very small number of people
so
that would be the counter position to
the to the case that you were making
that would yeah and it's it kind of it
falls apart on really a basic uh
scrutiny so
the id you know marxists talk a lot
about the distribution of resources they
never quite talk about the production of
resources and in fact all of the marxist
systems throughout history
they're great at distribution because
when you have all of the guns you can
take things from one person give them to
another they're really bad at production
and so uh you you have a kind of failure
of production throughout the 20th
century that was really catastrophic for
tens of millions of people the united
states actually uh has created a system
of production that has raised the basic
level of of of standard of living
beyond the wildest expectations of
almost anyone a century ago and it's not
out of exploitation um it's actually out
of cooperation it's out of the division
of labor uh it's out of having a price
mechanism uh where you can exchange your
labor you can exchange your time you can
exchange your cash uh you can exchange
other goods in a way that everyone is
winning and so if you look at even for
example to say well uh comparing it to
the third world
if you look at the ancestry of of all of
the different populations in the united
states european americans
african-americans latin americans etc
even down to the ethnic level um
you know being a european in the united
states you are much wealthier on average
than being a european in europe and the
same holds true from all the other
populations and then this is the reason
why people vote with their feet to come
to the united states from all over the
world but it's also why when you ask
people and survey data and even
anecdotally i think this is true you
know across the board
people believe in the united states and
in fact the only people who don't
believe in the united states are
left-wing whites that have high levels
of education uh and so when you ask uh
african-americans when you ask latinos
uh uh for example um you know is the
united states the greatest country in
the world people still say yes to a
great extent when you ask uh uh people
if if you work hard can you still get
ahead that basic bedrock principle of
the united states they still say yes
everyone except for people in the kind
of upper crust of our elite institutions
and the same thing holds true when you
talk about critical race theory
manhattan institute did a poll for
example asking parents
white parents black parents
asian parents
latino parents
do you think public schools should be
teaching that the united states is
systemically racist do you think public
schools should be teaching the doctrine
of white privilege
every group
black white asian and latino they all
said no we don't want this in our
schools and so the the marxists and then
the critical race there's have to
develop this really uh sophisticated and
almost absurd uh idea of false
consciousness yeah they've internalized
their oppression all those exactly and
they're saying
you know the working class in the united
states the racial minority in the united
states all of the people who we know are
oppressed
just as oppressed as they were
under jim crow just as oppressed as they
were under slavery they'd actually make
this argument which is just so absurd
they're really truly oppressed they just
don't know it and it's up to us to
explain it to them and even if they
don't agree with us we're going to
change the entire society on their
behalf and so the the really interesting
thing and i think the fatal uh a kind of
hypocrisy of critical race theory is
that these are the most privileged
people in the world the most privileged
people in human history to a great
extent regardless of racial background
trying to impose their ideology on
working-class people of all different
racial backgrounds who reject it it's
the same marxist
kind of jam that they get into the the
proletariat the working class uh the the
the racial minority doesn't want what
they're selling so they're just going to
do it for them i i think it's kind of a
a reversal of their entire philosophy
it's a kind of imperial intellectual
imperialism uh uh that they use the kind
of coded language of racial category
that's that's really uh been totally uh
totally
disconnected from the reality of even
race in this country yeah well it's so
annoying when the working class doesn't
know what's best for them and so so
let's let's take that apart in two ways
so one question might be well why is it
the educated white upper class so to
speak and i know this is more
characteristic of white upper-class
women by the way than of men
why is it that they are the ones most
likely to espouse these theories and i
would say and correct me if i'm wrong
there are perhaps two reasons for that
is one is they will be the last people
affected by the detrimental consequences
of these theories because they're
shielded from their effects and number
two this is a deeper problem you know
every system every economic system that
human beings have ever invented every
system of trade
which allows for cooperation let's say
and for us to benefit from the different
abilities of other people has also
simultaneously produced inequality
and inequality although necessary and i
would say for some reasons desirable
because there's no real difference by
the way between inequality and diversity
it also does put a heavy load on the
conscience of people you know if you're
um a san francisco
upper middle class housewife let's say
and you're walking down the street and
you see it littered with homeless people
so to speak who are suffering and who
clearly are suffering and who clearly
are marginalized and haven't been
brought within the confines of the
economic system for reasons that may be
partly due to their own misbehavior
let's say an inadequacies but also
partly because of sociological
circumstances that were beyond their
control it's very very difficult not to
feel that
your privilege and status is in some
sense
undeserved and also a moral burden and
very tempting therefore
to cheaply counterbalance that set of
guilt with with the proposition that not
only are you in a dormant position but
you're also firmly and 100 percent on
the side of the oppressed which is
something you see happening in ivy
league schools all the time and rob
henderson as you know don't know has
described this uh proclivity as luxury
beliefs right is that you get to have
your status and then instead of doing
what you should do to remediate the
problems of the world with that status
and privilege you jump on the bandwagon
of cheaply compassionate theories and
then you can have your cake your moral
cake and eat it too
i've been trying to parse out the
psychological reasons why it is
precisely those who are in these
positions of vaunted privilege let's say
who are more likely most likely to have
these revolutionary ideas do you have
any further thoughts on that
a couple things i mean hey this is kind
of a stock character in american history
if you look at the weather underground
movement in the late 60s early 1970s
which is really a kind of prototype for
all the things we're seeing today if you
read their manifesto prairie fire and i
highly recommend you read it um
i read it last year and i kind of my
eyes popped out of my head because it's
all of the things that were that k
through 12 students are learning today
uh you know white privilege
anti-colonialism uh kind of
marxist economics etc
that was at that time a radical fringe
idea that has now moved into the
mainstream but you look at the
backgrounds of all these people they're
all elites they're all people who are
the sons and daughters of bankers and
politicians and wealthy people in new
york city wealthy people in san
francisco they were living on you know
houseboats in marin while they were uh
you know planting bombs in police
stations and so you kind of say well
what is the psychology here what's
happening i think it's a couple things
certainly it functions as a luxury
belief to the extent that they're
insulated from the consequences of those
beliefs
i think we can't underestimate two
things however one is that a lot of
these people are just true believers the
people who are most fervent if you're
going to pick up a gun for example like
eric mann
did and shoot it into the window of a
police station in cambridge
massachusetts
you have to be
deeply committed and i think you see
that same spirit among people who are
members of antifa people who are members
of blm um they are really just possessed
by this idea and i think there's a
certain amount of attractiveness for
people who are maybe bored people who
maybe feel resentful
they can fuel that resentment and that
boredom into revolutionary action and
then they can take the mantle of
romanticism you know they can be che
guevara i mean that's a very attractive
figure yeah unless you know anything
about them you don't even have to
because you see the cool beret you see
the cool beard you see the cool kind of
high contrast print um and there's a
sense of fulfillment i think stemming
from anger resentment um a sense of
guilt you have this complex web of
emotions that are then manipulated by
media manipulated by activists
manipulated by other leadership and so
there's that latent i think there's also
a sense among people look these are my
peers you know i have a lead education
i've traveled in those circles i've
lived in those cities um there's a sense
i think among many of my peers in a way
especially the ones who are left and i
was on the left for many years kind of
graduated uh rightward over time
there's a sense that um
that they don't deserve it
there's a deep sense of inferiority yeah
well maybe they don't you know because
one well one open question well one
there's an open question here on the
guild front you know so there's a gospel
discussion of the unequal distribution
of talents right because it's pretty
clear that if you look at the world as
it's presently constituted and always
has been that you know some people are
more beautiful than others and some
people are healthier and some people are
more intelligent some people are more
hard working by nature and sometimes
some people are more creative and some
people are more compassionate there's
this massively unequal distribution of a
priory resources right what you come
into the world with not what you
deserve by dent of hard work and then
you might ask yourself well if you
happen to be born
we'll use all the tropes white
rich heterosexual healthy attractive and
you have all these benefits and
privileges and the luxury of this let's
say immense wealth that was gathered by
your parents
why shouldn't you feel guilty about that
and then what because look at all the
people who don't have that and it was
just handed to you was just laid at your
feet and the answer that's put forward
in the new testament and i don't like to
refer to religious matters unless it's
necessary is that to those to whom much
has been given much will be asked and so
then you might say well if you have all
this remarkable technological and
economic privilege much of which was
unearned and even much of which or some
of which was
purchased at the cost of historical
atrocity
what should you do and the answer is you
should put yourself together so you're
as good ethically as you are rich
financially but that's a heavy moral
burden and a heavy burden of
responsibility and then i think you can
take these cheap and uninformed roots
out and some of that's just based in
miseducation and pure ignorance so that
you can accrue to yourself the moral
virtue that's necessary to solve your
conscience without having to do any of
the real difficult work that making a
full accounting of your talents and
atoning for your privilege would
actually require
yeah i think that's 100 right and i
think that um
you have then a group of people people i
mean people who look like me people who
are my age
um that are struggling to find an
identity struggling to find a a
structure struggling to have a standard
of living maybe better than their
parents um and then even people who come
from wealthy backgrounds there's a
tremendous pressure right if you're born
to that level of privilege it's very
high to very difficult to maybe exceed
uh your family in the past though we had
a kind of paternal structure uh where
you're saying hey even you're kind of a
a kind of wayward son of a wealthy
family you have to come into the fold
you have to be a good steward of these
resources you have to you know build
libraries you have to build the opera
house you have to do great works that
show that you can assume the
responsibility of this wealth and
prestige and then really provide it back
to the community in a substantial right
right right that's very difficult it's
much easier to you know put on the kefia
march at a blm protest and then you know
run a family foundation writing checks
to a bunch of useless non-profits you
get the status you get the prestige you
get the love you get the identity as a
kind of class traitor but it's an
adolescent posture of rebellion from a
generation that refuses to grow up and
become a father let's say or become a
mother become a kind of matriarch figure
and so you have these permanent children
that are in eternal revolution against
their parents uh that for them are
symbolically represented in this society
and they feel like they can stuff that
feeling or satisfy that feeling with
these kind of uh uh the sugar high of
revolution by play acting um but it it
deals tremendous damage to real people
and you know the reason i'm a
conservative as opposed to where i
started 10 15 years ago as a kind of on
the far left
is that i saw in the international
context in many places
what happens when these ideas take hold
but i also saw even spent five years in
three of america's poorest cities
observing these communities
the theory of systemic racism white
privilege intersectionality etc all the
solutions that they proffer are very
good if you want to achieve social
status and position in an ivy league
university they're disastrous once they
trickle down are imposed on poor people
of any racial background and so this
this this this feeling this
psychological profile i i think is one
of the most important things of our time
i think that's why your work has been so
successful and why people on the left
have furiously uh uh uh kind of rejected
it and furious like in a deranged way
lashed out against it because you're
calling them to responsibility yeah i
got a funny story for that man so you
know
i i've had the misfortune to be invited
to speak at universities and i say
misfortune because although some of the
time that goes quite well the most
disastrous
public events of my life have been on
university campuses where i'm harassed
by student radicals or literally
accosted by them
yelled at by unbelievably narcissistic
brats um
generally harassed a lot by the
administration for even daring to go to
the damn university having all sorts of
obstacles put in my path when i agree to
do so and then um and spending a lot of
time and resources
to speak to people who are often
extremely narcissistic for very little
effect now that's not always the case
i've had good
experiences at cambridge and at mit and
at stanford most recently and so it can
work but it often doesn't and so
the the uh
i figured out a way to go to a
university and have it work and this is
really quite funny i figured this out
about five years ago so imagine i'm
invited to a university and i'm worried
that there's going to be protests and i
worry because sometimes there are
murderous people at those protests it's
no joke and people get in my face and
they threaten me and physically as well
as psychologically and i'm not afraid of
that but it makes me so angry that i'm
afraid of my own anger in situations
like that i i joke with my security
people that half of the reason they're
there is to stop me from attacking other
people and i mean that you know it's a
joke but it's also not a joke anyways i
figured out very early that if i had a
meeting at a university at eight o'clock
in the morning i'd never have a
protester in sight
because none of them had the bloody
discipline to stick to their principles
in a with enough what would you say
assiduousness so that they would
sacrifice their late night drinking
session the night before so they
wouldn't be too hungover and bleary-eyed
to come out and confront the you know
the evil pro the evil professor who is
going to go out there and warp their
compatriots and so the fact that i could
circumvent the bloody activists by
merely showing up early in the morning
is a pretty fundamental indictment of
their the fundamental maturity of their
motivation and also something that's
blackly comical in the deepest possible
sense and the fact that these idiot
professors on these left-wing campuses
take the messianic delusions of these
overgrown adolescents with some degree
of seriousness overlay that with
compassion and then invite them to
become useless activists and thereby
fulfill their moral
the moral demands that their own
conscience puts on them is an
unbelievably deep indication of the
absolute moral bankruptcy of the modern
university
so
i love it and and and weak parents
create narcissistic children and so the
administrator is the weak parent and the
children are quite narcissistic and you
know this reminds me your your story
reminds me of two things one
you know my dad was an immigrant from
italy uh came over as a teenager with
his family very poor had nothing uh his
father immediately died when they came
over my dad uh uh became the man of the
household and uh he was a great athlete
a good student got a scholarship was
living at home and this was during the
kind of 1960s 1970s vietnam war protests
all of the kind of hippies and and that
kind of counterculture
and
you know my dad got a scholarship to go
to to go to college was working the
whole time to support his mother support
his sister kind of help the family um
and and and you tell he says you know
i see all these hippies all the rich
kids were the were the hippies and the
protesters and the counter-culture he
says the working-class kids you know we
had to get a job we had to take things
seriously we had to you know show up to
work
and uh you know
it it really is this kind of class
inversion it's this
inversion of marxism where our elites
are the marxist revolutionaries and our
working-class people are our
conservatives because they need that set
of structures and values in order for
them to have a dignified and meaningful
life
and so we have an elite class that wants
to dissolve all of the social and
economic structures that are providing
the basis for stable lives at the bottom
the second story i'm going to tell you
is very interesting my wife and i uh
went to see you
in seattle washington a number of years
ago at one of your speeches
next to us was this uh kid young kid
maybe 25
we got to talking to him before the show
before you and dave came on
and he said you know i drove you know
hour and a half i drove from the kind of
more rural area here in washington state
and uh you know my life was a mess a few
years ago um i was doing drugs i was not
showing up to work i was waking up late
i was you know just couldn't quite get
things together i was anxious all the
time
and i was on youtube i'm not much of a
reader you know barely finished high
school and i listened to jordan peterson
i don't know how
and then piece by piece i started
following those basic building blocks of
his advice now i'm working full
full-time i've got a great job on a
construction crew i'm getting paid over
time i wanted to hear him speak
and so i for me it was a kind of
remarkable uh uh uh example of this
phenomenon where you have people in the
country especially younger people
especially people from a middle class or
working class for whom the stakes are
high if you screw up and you're from a
working-class family your life can be a
disaster very quickly
and you're giving this kind of
time-tested advice about how to grow up
how to take responsibility um and it
makes a difference in people's lives and
and i think the reason why the left is
so upset with you maybe the reason
they're so upset with me in in the same
token
is that they're trying to give advice to
the working class that will end up
destroying their lives
you're trying to give advice to working
class people that will make their lives
better
and it exposes the fraudulence of their
ideas it exposes the hypocrisy of their
position and it really exposes uh the
kind of vengeful heart of their ideology
um and and to me that's really what what
what converted me out of the left i
can't spend any more time with these
phony people
with these people who are the sons and
daughters of immense privilege that are
acting revolut playing revolutionary
trying to impose a set of ideas that i
know out of my own observation in all
the countries around the world as well
as spending significant time in the
poorest places in the united states lead
to nothing but disaster well don't
forget death it's not just disaster it's
torture and death right wide scale
economic failure utter catastrophe okay
so let's let's do this let's
let's um first of all throw out a
compassionate rope to the
narcissistic messianic young people who
are entranced by the universities
because
one of the things that i have learned as
a university professor is if you take
people who have some vengeful motivation
and some resentment let's say to their
parents into broader society and you say
well look
things are corrupted by power and you're
going to feel oppressed and that's the
constant lot of mankind since the
beginning of day one because history is
is is is anachronistic and out of date
and there is an element of atrocity in
it so you're going to have an
antagonistic relationship to some degree
with your past but the appropriate thing
to do that is to do with that is to put
everything in its proper place and to
realize that as an active moral agent
you can remediate the sins of the past
as a consequence of your ethical
striving and if you introduce young
people to that idea and show them a
pathway forward that doesn't
allow them to
merely mask their new and hard-won
cynicism you know they're no longer
naive they can see that the world has
some problems and that can easily send
them into a tailspin you say yeah yeah
the problems are there but they don't
constitute the core
uh
central spirit let's say of mankind that
the desire to dominate then you can set
them on a more appropriate path and so
these narcissistic young people bear
some of the responsibility for their
idiot revolutionary presumptions but the
fools and mountain banks and revengeful
dimwits who educate them bear at least
as much responsibility who miseducate
them who anti-educate them who make them
stupider and worse than they would have
been had they not attended the
institution
at all as well as picking 160 000 out of
the pockets of their future earnings for
the privilege of doing so even while
they didn't attend university say during
the covid period as we might point out
and so
having said that and putting the uh
responsibility on the educators
especially the faculties of education
which are damned right to their core i
would also like to take some issue with
this notion
that
power is the fundamental motivation that
governs social interaction so i i want
to just mention three facts and then we
can discuss them so first of all there
are a percentage of people who use
power as their fundamental
ethos
in the governance of their social
relations and so psychopaths do that and
so do the dark triad types
machiavellians
and narcissists and so so the three of
those make up the dark triad and then
you might ask yourself well if
psychopaths
wield power and that's their fundamental
motivation and their ethos how
successful are they if our societies are
basically dominated by power and power
structures then you'd expect the
psychopathic types to thrive and the
data on that anthropologically and
psychologically is quite clear you get
the cynics who say well all those who
occupy the upper echelons of power and
authority are psychopaths but that's
simply not true and the reason it's not
true is because psychopathy is actually
a very
um
ineffective adaptive strategy even
biologically speaking so being a
psychopath means if you're a male that
you can fool some of the girls some of
the time with your pretensions to
competence and power that are false and
now and then as a consequence you can
reproduce and that's how psycho
psychopathy propagates itself
biologically it's not an effective
reproductive strategy but it doesn't
have zero utility in some situations so
it can be exploited but the
anthropological and cross-cultural data
show quite clearly that psychopathy
rates vary between one and five percent
stabilize around three percent so that
if it falls to one percent there's too
few psychopaths and everybody falls
asleep and then the psychopaths can
can have full sway and they increase but
if it hits five percent all the
and i would say tough men and women with
an eye for deceit and malevolence wake
up and think oh my god look at all the
psychopaths we better do something about
this and they knock them back to three
percent i should also point out that
psychopaths despite the common notion
cynical notion again that they're
hyper-successful let's say in big
business are not successful at all
because the clinical data shows very
clearly that psychopaths betray their
future selves just as badly as they
betray other people and so it's a it's a
counterproductive adaptive strategy in
iterative games and it might be better
than laying inert
castrated so to speak in your mother's
basement till you're 50 but it isn't a
good pathway through life so that's
number one power does not work as a
motivation for mediating social
relations
just try using it on your wife
constantly and see how far that gets you
number two
let's make the case that it's power that
uh propels animals upward in their
social hierarchies right and so it's the
it's a dominant animal that achieves
reproductive success and maybe the
cardinal example of that is among
chimpanzees where the alpha chimp who's
the roughest toughest dominating
oppressive patriarchal male gets access
to all the females and rules with an
iron fist and that by the way is
complete bloody rubbish it's not true
and franz dewall the famous famous dutch
primatologist who's been studying
chimpanzees with uh
with incredible perspicacity over the
last 30 years has demonstrated very
clearly that
sometimes even the alpha chimp so to
speak is the smallest male in the troop
who allies himself with powerful females
and who is an exceptional peacemaker and
extremely reciprocal tit-for-tat love
thy neighbor as thyself in his
relationships with his male friends and
they have friendships that can span
decades and so the primate alpha is a
coalition builder and a peacemaker not
dominant and the ones who try to use
dominance and sometimes succeed for
short periods of time destabilize their
whole societies and are likely to meet a
brutal vicious end at the hand of two or
more chimps who they've unfortunately
and uh dangerously subordinated so and
then
next if that's not enough
um i did some work on the anthropology
of the doctrine of the elders so in many
uh tribal and agricultural societies
there's this um
uh what would you call proclivity for
governance to devolve towards so-called
elders and they're often male but not
always because the wise females can play
a role too and so then the question is
in these societies cross-culturally
who's elevated to the status of elder
and you might say well it's the roughest
toughest most dominant chimp-like
oppressive patriarchal male and that
actually happens to not be the case at
all and so what you do see is that
productive males who are older so they
have to be productive who are
simultaneously generous and reciprocal
and are recognized as such in their
communities
he'll hold the status of authority and
help govern properly and so we could say
that there's no evidence whatsoever on
the scientific or anthropological front
that the doctrine that the prime human
motivation for the construction of
social relations is power and i would
add to that further that if you think
that power is the fundamental motivation
of
humankind that is a confession not an
observation and so look out for people
who make that claim because they're
making that claim to justify to
themselves their own use of psychopathic
and narcissistic social mediation uh
strategies and so i don't see that the
leftists who make the claim that power
is the fundamental motivation have a
shred of evidence on their side
sociologically scientifically
anthropologically politically
economically theologically or ethically
and then we might add to that just in
closing an observation that you already
made which is okay guys
um
if it's not capitalism which to be
admitted produces inequality just like
every other bloody economic system we've
ever created then what is it and then
the idea would be well it's the
socialist utopia where everybody has
what they need and and does for others
what they can to to paraphrase marx's
famous dicta and you might say well
when has that actually worked
successfully and not resulted in
absolute economic catastrophe and mass
murder and the answer is well pretty
much never and then you say well doesn't
that constitute evidence
to invalidate your claim and they say
well you know really
the reason that the marxist doctrines
haven't worked is because they've never
been implemented properly
and so what do you think about that
claim is that fundamentally the doctrine
is sound but for whatever reason
maybe it's the machinations of evil
capitalists and the you know the
reactionary tendency of oppressive
patriarchs to to scuttle the socialist
enterprise like we did by refusing to
trade with venezuela and the actual
reason why these egalitarian states
never work isn't because of the doctrine
but because of
reaction from those who are putting
forward traditional liberal and
conservative views so what do you do
about that claim
i i mean
it's so absurd you try something you
know a thousand times it never works uh
uh uh the the evidence is in on marxist
economics you look at even the
theoretically marxist states in in the
world today uh specifically china um
even even india which had a kind of
socialistic economy until 1990 um all of
these emerging economies that tried the
socialist or even the kind of state
marxist systems they've abandoned them
to the point where actually let's say
china or vietnam that are still
efficiently communist countries have
actually a lower rate of state
expenditure as a percentage of gdp than
the united states the united states is
actually in some measurements more
socialistic than the marxist leninist or
communist countries in the world and so
the evidence is in among anyone who's
experienced a communist economy
they're all fleeing that system as fast
as possible well let's let's let's
elaborate on that for a moment because
that's really accelerated since 1989
when the wall fell
and the reason it's accelerated is
because the communists aren't actively
intermediating let's say in african
economies to the degree that they were
and dementing people into adopting
observed economic policies to impoverish
their people and so what's been the
consequence of that since the 1980s and
the answer is that as these great
economies china and india included but
also with africa increasingly have
adapted themselves to free market
policies and rule of law and
respect for the integrity and dignity of
the individual what's happened is that
we've seen an unpredict unprecedented
expansion of general wealth all around
the world and we've lifted more people
out of poverty merely in the last 12
years that had been lifted out of
poverty in the entire history of
humankind before that at any given
moment and that's all a consequence and
then we could say as to elaborate on
your point is that you look at china
so china was is was and is a communist
country but the reason that china has
leapt forward and is now becoming twice
as rich by the way in terms of
purchasing parity power parity every
seven years twice as rich is because
they set up special economic zones that
were basically predicated on the hong
kong model where they could leave the
free enterprise types alone within the
broader confines of the ethically
appropriate communism and those places
took off like mad which meant that as
soon as you got the mad men and the
resentful sons of out of the way
that the in essential uh conscientious
striving and native intelligence of the
chinese population was able to manifest
itself and turn that country from an
impoverished and and
and starving country in many ways and
into one of the world's industrial
powerhouses and that only took a couple
of decades and so
i've always thought when i hear these
the marxist types claim that you know
real marxism has never been tried that
they think narcissistically something
along the following lines which is well
you know stalin didn't do a very good
job and lennon didn't do a very good job
and neither did mao and and neither did
paul pott and those are quite a few
different cultures and situations boys
and girls but if i would have been the
tyrant in charge then with all my wisdom
and my deep knowledge of marxist
doctrine then the socialist utopia
certainly would have come to fruition
and so there's a luciferian narcissism
driving this activism that's almost well
it's certainly ungodly in its magnitude
and it pretty much goes all the way to
the bottom and even if that's not true
of the individual holders of these
luciferian vengeful ideas it's
definitely true of the pretensions of
the system of ideas
itself
i i think the china idea the china
example is very important and we have a
rough analog here in the united states
so the question is you you've laid it
out i think everyone knows this even in
the 1950s and 1960s the sophisticated
and honest marxist intellectuals in the
west for example herbert marcuzza in his
book on soviet marxism
they admitted this they said that this
system does not work it can't solve the
production problem uh it can't uh it's
it's revolved into bureaucratic tyranny
and repression uh then you have
solzhenitsyn everyone knows this then
you have the fall of communism uh where
it was kind of the definitive and and
and kind of explosion of this system so
the question then becomes if everyone
knows that this is the this is how it
works everyone can observe it everyone
who's smart knows this already why are
they still promoting it and i think the
reason is not because of some genuine
conviction that well if only trotsky uh
had been had gained power it would have
worked out better if only we can try it
again it would work out great this time
um i don't think they believe that and i
actually don't think that deeply in
their kind of heart of hearts
they actually want to have a socialist
or a communist economy because that
would require them managing and running
physical production which for
intellectuals is like oh my gosh get me
out of a factory i can't change a tire
just forget it
and so what the actual uh kind of
gramscian adaptation is in a
post-soviet historical period is we
don't really want to uh you know take
over the uh uh you know the the die-cut
tool factory in rural michigan to create
auto parts um we're not interested in
that we want to redistribute prestige
and social status and so it's a real
cynical game where they speak the
language of marxism they speak the
language of empowering the working class
they speak the language of material
redistribution but when it comes down to
it they don't really care they know it
wouldn't really work and i think
secretly they hope that it doesn't
happen because they benefit from this
incredible economic production because
again they have those high status
positions they're entrenched in their
economic uh fortunes they have economic
security through the bureaucracy through
the tenure system etc so they're
cynically pushing this narrative as a
way to redistribute status and prestige
which is really what they crave that's
the real currency that's the real
redistribution well everyone crave
everyone craves that everyone craves
that christopher i would say because
there isn't anything that you have
that's more valuable than your
reputation
you trade on your reputation and if
you're known by people as an honest
and reciprocal player whose word is his
bond and who will do what he says he
will do
then everyone lines up to play with you
and your economic viability
is
is uh guaranteed and so what what we're
tempted by constantly is the
is the
we're tempted by the strategy of
accruing to ourselves false reputation
and it is a form of narcissism and
machiavellianism and psychopathy because
what it means is that
people who have stored up genuine value
in their reputation and who have been
honest players and who know how to work
and know how to share are
much more likely to be rewarded with a
deserved prestige but the narcissists
and the psychopaths and the intellectual
machiavellians can parasitize that by
making unwarranted moral claims and then
saying about themselves that they are as
good or better than the people they're
criticizing and because they have
intellectual prowess they're often able
to out argue the people who have accrued
genuine moral virtue that might be like
the self-made working-class types who
know what's right and who act out what's
right but who aren't as able to
articulate it which is a challenge on
the conservative side so
so let's if you don't mind let's turn to
a minute well in our remaining time for
a minute to
what you've been doing more practically
and so a lot of this discussion has in
fact been intellectual and so let's nail
it back down to the ground you've been
working on the policy front in a variety
of different states most notably florida
and so and to push back
practically against the inroads of the
system of ideas that we've been
discussing and so tell me how that's
come about what it is and what you think
the advantages and pitfalls are
sure well i i think first of all um uh
as i said at the outset what we have to
understand is that um if if you want to
take the metaphor of production there's
kind of intellectual production right
now that is now being dominated by a
specific ideology and then using the
transmission belt of the institutions in
order to corrupt them in order to
achieve dominance over them that was
their strategy that they laid out in the
early 1990s in critical race theory and
queer theory for example i think the two
most prominent theories that we're
grappling with today
and they've achieved this and i think
that there's a a need and a genuine a
necessity uh for people to understand
the theories at an intellectual or
abstract level a lot of the power just
as you've said of these ideas is because
they're intimidating for people who
don't have a background uh in academia a
background in uh to understand the the
terminology or the concepts behind these
ideas
um and so they'll they'll be kind of
kind of bullied into submission in a way
but the the key takeaway and the key
thing i've been working on i'm really
trying to to to explain is that um when
ideas
when when ideology becomes attached to
administrative power in a permanent and
and meaningful way you have a revolution
that is the definition of a revolution a
kind of disruptive ideology achieves
administrative and bureaucratic power so
we're in actually those conditions today
we're in the midst of a soft super
structural cultural revolution
and
the goal for conservatives should be to
sever that connection between those
ideologies and bureaucratic power you
can't do that through mere persuasion
you can't do that through mere
intellectual discussion or debate you
can't do that even by convincing a
majority of the public which in which in
these cases we've already done to to
agree with you to share your point of
view you actually have to say hey wait a
minute these ideas are wholly subsidized
by public dollars whether it's at
universities which are directly financed
by the public or private universities
which are subsidized through student
loan guarantees by the public or whether
it's the k-12 school system or
government agencies the critical
theories critical race theory critical
gender theory queer theory whatever you
want to call them are a creature of the
state they're a creature of the
bureaucracy they cannot survive without
public subsidy which means they cannot
survive without the continued support of
legislators at the state level and at
the federal level
and so what should we do about this well
we should say hey wait a minute these
ideas violate the basic
values the basic beliefs of the majority
of the
citizens in the republic
who should then vote for legislators and
encourage their legislators to use the
democratic process
in order to reform those systems and
bureaucracies to align them more more
closely with the values and the true
telos of the public uh
whom they represent
and so what i want to do is really start
to outline specifically how we can do
that to say hey wait a minute if you're
in a red state let's say or even if
you're in a supposedly purple state
trending red like florida
you don't have to be permanently
subsidizing left-wing ideologies at
every level of your government if you're
a republican president for example i've
worked with president trump on this hey
wait a minute why are you why is the
federal government not through the not
through a legislative necessity or kind
of a a specific
legislative priority or or requirement
but through the executive function
spending hundreds of millions of dollars
per year subsidizing critical race
theory subsidizing programs that promote
those ideas subsidizing grants and other
other funding mechanisms how do you how
do you know okay so i'm i'm i'm
listening to you and and and
understanding your point i worked as an
academic and a researcher for many years
and one of the things that always
disturbed me was when my research became
subordinate to government demand so for
example i was working on um
assessing the onset of alcoholism in
young men who didn't have alcoholic
fathers or mothers by the way and i
concentrated on young men because
they're much more likely to become
alcoholic and because if your mother was
alcoholic you might have fetal alcohol
syndrome and that would
be an additional complicating factor in
the research and what happened was that
partly because of diversity requirements
which which the clintons brought in i
was forced to include females in equal
number in my studies and i just simply
couldn't do that because i couldn't
include female alcoholics and so i just
stopped doing it all together and my
research lab along with that of my
mentor robert peel had done some of the
fundamental work in outlining the
biological basis of the propensity for
alcoholism so that was just scuttled so
i'm very afraid when i hear policy
makers including you
despite our the white grounds for our
agreement talk about how
legislatures can now intervene
um and i know they're doing that anyway
right that and that's part of your point
how they can intervene
in terms of funding to stop subsidizing
ideas that are deemed undesirable but
you know that brings up
i don't say i have a solution to this by
the way that but it brings up the
specter of producing a government
bureaucracy who regards it as its
mission to police intellectual content
so how do we how do we thread that
needle do you think
a couple different ways first i think
you have to to to take a step back and
really assess the status quo there's
this there's this kind of again what i
think of as a myth or a delusion among
many of my friends even on the
center-right or maybe the libertarian
right where they say no no no we don't
meddle with the government we don't
meddle with the bureaucracy we don't
meddle with public universities that's
an infringement on let's so-called
academic freedom that's an infringement
on the free market et cetera but when
you say we're going to take a kind of
non-interventionist approach
in a government agency that government
agency will be filled by people who have
vastly different values than you do and
they have no qualms about intervening so
you you seed the playing field you see
the territory to your enemies but even
more broadly at a very abstract level at
a general level these are public
institutions these are institutions that
are already chartered governed funded
and and and then administered by the
government by the people by legislation
and so the question is not do we want
legislation and meddling or do we not
want it that's an impossibility the
question is what what are the ground
rules what are the guidelines and what
are the principles by which our
institute are public institutions should
be governed and my argument is to say is
to to to to abdicate on that question
which is difficult i i agree with you
it's difficult there can be overreach
there can be problems it's very
complicated um but to abdicate and to
pretend that you don't have to answer
that question is a recipe for guaranteed
failure and the continued corruption of
what we see in our institutions today
and so the the conservative or someone
who wants to change these institutions
has to recognize that these are
fundamentally political questions
there's no abstract and totally
disconnected
uh intellectual freedom in the public
university you have intellectual freedom
under the first amendment as an
individual citizen
but you don't have license to do
whatever you want with a permanent
taxpayer subsidy even if you're
violating uh the spirit of the law
violating the letter of the law
violating the will of the voters through
their state representatives and so while
it is a difficult question it's a
question that we cannot refuse to answer
and in fact we have to recognize that
there will be a set of rules governing
our public institutions the question is
who sets them and what will those rules
be oh well okay so here's here's a
counter example let's say um it's rather
radical so i've been speaking at some
length recently with the president of
hillsdale college in michigan and
hillsdale is a conservative institution
i would say a traditional
educational institution and one that's
thriving and also offering from what i
can tell a genuine education to its
students in the deepest sense and larry
arn who's the president is very
respectable man in all the positive ways
and they decided a long time ago
50 years i believe i think it was in the
1960s that they would not take a cent of
government funding
and the consequence of that is that they
haven't and the secondary consequence is
because the place is unbelievably well
managed and governed that they attract
way more students than they can possibly
take they're growing like mad and they
have a one percent dropout rate one
percent not forty or fifty percent one
percent and also the academic
performance margin between males and
females at hillsdale is actually quite
small by comparative standards which is
also an indication of their of the
positive quality of their efforts on the
educational front and so maybe i don't
know man maybe part of the issue here is
is it possible that if we set up public
education institutions per se
that we end up in a situation where
they're going to be dominated by
parasitic bureaucrats who are pushing an
ideological agenda and that that's an
equal danger right now it's a real
danger on the left clearly because they
dominate the educational establishment
but maybe merely
setting our systems up so they are
publicly funded to such a great degree
makes the probability that they will
become ideologically dominated
approach 100 percent
that's probably right for the same
reason that it's kind of the marxist
economic problem they're insulated from
consequences they're subsidized they
don't have to have productivity they can
raise their prices in perpetuity to
extreme levels because there's those
government subsidies coming in on the
student loan front yeah definitely i
think you want to have a more
competitive environment um i love
hillsdale i was a visiting lecturer
there earlier this year got to know dr
arn um and and and and well i would say
they've really created a model of
extreme integrity
uh extreme accountability extreme
responsibility towards those students
and i think a pedagogy that works that
has stood the test of time um that is uh
in some ways a progressive in the good
sense of the word hillsdale of course
was famously one of the first colleges
in the country to accept uh
african americans to accept black
students in in the kind of uh
mid-1800s in its initial class in its
initial class right off the bat that's
right yeah regardless of of race color
creed uh
nationality etc
but something else that's happening with
hillsdale that i think is very exciting
and i think is worth the risk uh dr arn
and the governor of tennessee have
recently struck a deal where hillsdale
is going to found and operate
50 charter schools so publicly funded
charter schools
following the hillsdale classical
education pedagogical approach
in partnership with the government of
tennessee
and sure there are risks to this
approach but i think that again if you
compare it to the status quo it's an
it's an improvement will there be other
problems and questions that we have to
resolve in three years five years ten
years of course yeah well how do you
know for example how do you know that
your attempts aren't going to degenerate
rapidly let's say in 10 years into
something that's indistinguishable from
indistinguishable from a persecution of
those who hold for temperamental reasons
let's say political views that tilt them
towards the left i'm not saying that you
would do that although i would say it's
hard to resist the temptation you know
especially given that the playing field
right now is so bloody lopsided you know
that does set up the desire to
to level the playing field problem with
leveling the damn playing field is you
tend to level the players you know and
so
so i don't uh so well so
go ahead here's what i think the ideal
is i think it's important for us to kind
of reflect on okay well let's solve
these practical problems sure there's no
guarantee right um
there's no guarantee i think it's the
only guarantee is that it's an
experiment that could be better than the
status quo and likely would be better
but i think the question is well what
system do we want what is that end
vision and the end vision that i have
one i'm working towards um
is a system of greater pluralism a
system of greater independence and a
system of greater self-governance and so
another good example is in arizona they
recently passed legislation the great
governor down there doug ducey
saying if you want to opt out of the
public school system if it's violating
your conscience if it's not if it's not
uh uh serving your needs if it's not
ideal for your kids we'll give you as a
family me as a family 7 000 a year per
child to take to any educational
institution of your choice right charter
school private school religious school
home school
and so these different models saying hey
we're going to have hillsdale charter
schools we're going to have
educational funding follow the family
giving them greater choice can create in
the same and same way of a capitalist
economic system a more competitive
educational environment where people can
go to an institution that reflects their
values that serves their needs where
they can have self-governance or local
governance and then you can have you
know if hey look i'm personally if you
want to have critical race theory as as
your k-12 pedagogy you love it um all
power to you you should have a school
that serves your needs that reflects
your values i'll respect that
but we want to have a system of greater
pluralism so communities can really come
together around a set of shared values
they can take responsibility for those
institutions
and so we want to have this patchwork
republic this this system where uh
people can find something that really
speaks to them and then you have a
greater overall system at the general
level of competition so they can say hey
wait a minute the crt schools are
crashing and burning they're a total
disaster they're run by pathological
people and their outcomes are poor and
we have other options that are actually
performing better right now there's no
competition there's no alternatives you
are stuck in a residential assigned
public school that is a zero-sum game
for the competition of values and
competition of ideologies they're set at
the state level okay so let me ask you
about that too have have you talked to
any political types at the governorship
level let's say about the fact that the
faculties of education have a stronghold
on certifying teachers because that's
part of the problem because those
institutions are 100 percent captured i
think i could say safely that there are
no more corrupt institutions in western
society in general than faculties of
education and so why is it the case that
states everywhere
only require a teaching certificate
let's say teaching certification from
faculties of education why not open up
that up to holders of bachelor's degrees
more generally and remove the
stranglehold of these centralized
institutions is there anything happening
on that front
there is i've talked to a number of
governors and then many many state
legislators they're aware of this
problem they're aware that it functions
as an ideological cartel that is
permanently subsidized by taxpayers and
then controls the key transmission belt
of ideology to the k-12 system it also
attracts the wrong people it weeds out
the right people
and so this is the phenomenon where you
have the kind of the kind of proverbial
pink hair elementary school teacher uh
talking about uh you know pansexuality
with their second graders
those come from the graduate schools of
education legislators know this is a
problem and there's model legislation
that is working through the system right
now that i think has a good chance of
passing in the coming years where
they're going to do a couple things
they're going to say
no more requirement for these teacher
teacher training certificates or
master's degrees from graduate schools
of education if you have a bachelor's
degree
in the subject area for example let's
say you have a bachelor's in math you
can automatically be qualified to teach
high school math uh if you have a
bachelor's degree at the elementary
school level you have an automatic
qualification to enter the teaching
force and then there's even people
saying hey look we want to have a kind
of merit-based system they take a
competency test they take a subject
matter expertise tests similar to the
old sat2s do you know american history
do you know math can you perform
i think that's coming
i think this is something that is
absolutely uh gonna happen and then what
will happen is
by attrition we'll bleed out those
non-competitive and really captured
institutions like the graduate schools
of education and the graduate schools of
education are very aware of this they're
very aware of this they're very scared
they're fighting very hard well i'm so
pleased to hear that so look everybody
our time is coming to an end here i've
been talking today with christopher
ruffo who's proved himself to be quite
an ideological intellectual
philosophical and practical thorn in the
side of those who wish to push
revolutionary marxist doctrines to
elevate their own reputation in an
unearned manner and uh it was a pleasure
talking to you today and i'm very happy
that we were able to walk through the
complexities of these things to outline
the history of these ideas to discuss
their
virtues let's say in relationship to
critiques of power and their
shortcomings philosophically and
practically i would have liked to delve
more into the ideas of intersectionality
to get into the weeds a bit on that
front
but we'll save that for another
discussion everyone i'm going to talk to
christopher a little bit more behind the
daily wire plus paywall um i've parsed
out my time now on the youtube interview
front into two sections one where i
discuss broad ideas with a bit of an
emphasis on the personal with my guests
and then to spend an additional half an
hour which is a plus hence daily wire
plus let's say
for those who are interested in
subscribing i'm going to talk to
christopher today about his intellectual
journey personally i'm interested for
example he mentioned that he was quite
radically on the left side for a while
and i want to find out why that was and
how that changed
hello everyone i would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com